on april 5th 1975
a conference entitled the central
intelligence agency
and world peace was held in new haven
connecticut on the campus of yale
university
from the evening session of the
conference
buses de allende widow of assassinated
president
salvador allende of chile gives a
firsthand account
of the events leading to the fascist
coup of september 1973.
since the coup in chile the constitution
has been suspended
congress and political parties dissolved
and trade unions banned
she details cia support of the military
junta
which has resulted in the suspension of
civil liberties
along with death and imprisonment for
thousands of chileans
she will be heard in her native spanish
with simultaneous
english translation hotencia busey
dialiende
[Music]
dear friends of the new haven
community i want to thank you on behalf
of the people of chile especially those
people
who have suffered prison torture or
death under the dreadful
military dictatorship we consider this
invitation to talk about the cia and
world peace
i have arrived here not without
difficulties
to enter this country if in the past
we've suffered the economic boycott
and the internal external subversion
today they want to impose a conspiracy
of silence
to keep the facts and the pernicious
effects of the policies of intervention
from being known that is why we highly
value this meeting
you have named this seminar the sian
peace we feel that it would be just as
proper to call it
the cn fascism against peace it is no
longer a secret today
that cia activities are directed to
stimulate
to stimulate the establishment of
fascist regimes
which are a constant threat to democracy
and constantly
to world peace
it appears a crude irony of history
that this great nation was which was the
first to gain
its independence in the western
hemisphere under the banner of the
people's right to self-determination
should now be known because of its
leaders as the champion of intervention
and as the support of puppet regimes
opposed to the people's will
el capitulo related
the chapter concerning cia and north
american imperialistic intervention
in chile is by no means closed it is
just beginning
each day we know of new facts which up
to date have been hidden from the north
american people
and from international public opinion
especially
it is necessary that these so-called
secrets
be known it is necessary that the
mysteries
that envelop the monstrous maneuvers
executed by the agents of the great
economic interests
hidden from the noble and generous
people of the united states
be
it is to these people of the united
states these people who are not
implicated
in this crime which is which is which
was perpetrated which is perpetrated
by many interests that i appeal to from
here
i ask these people of the united states
to insist that the intervention
and responsibility in the fascist
massacre which occurs in chile
be completely clarified and known the
intervention of the united states
government
started before the military coup in
chile
not only in september 1973 the object
was to prevent salvador allende's
victory
it was done at the back of the north
american people and congress
existed
today there is full and confessed
confirmation
of imperialism and cia participation
in the process culminating in the
overthrow and death
of the constitutional president of chile
salvador allende
our country now symbolizes a policy of
aggression by a powerful country
violating all international norms
against a small nation
that was searching the road of its
independence
through free and democratic means
[Music]
[Laughter]
today president allende's constant
denunciations have proven to be true
since 1972
in his speech before the united nations
he declared quote
my country is the victim of a grave
aggression
and has been since the very moment of
our electoral triumph
on september the 4th 1970 we are
affected by the development of powerful
external pressures
which tried to prevent the installation
of a government
freely elected by the people and
attempted to defeat it ever since
they have intended to isolate us from
the world strangle our economy
paralyze our promise in our main export
product
copper and prevent our access to sources
of international financial aid
and president allende continued on that
occasion
quote we are conscious that when we
denounce the economic and financial
blockade
such a situation is not easily
understood by the international public
opinion
not even by some of our own countrymen
because it is not a declared
open aggression without disguise before
the face of the world
on the contrary it is always an
underground attack
indirect but none nonetheless damaging
for chile
we find ourselves faced with forces
which operate in the shadows
without a flag with powerful weapons
posted in the various places of
influence
end of quote
the president
unfortunately this dramatic warning fell
on
on deaf ears in order for it to come to
light and draw attention
it has been necessary to kill a
president massacre
thirty thousand chileans imprison one
hundred thousand people
and abolish all civil liberties
president
allende in his last words said it once
again from inside the government palace
enveloped in frames quote
foreign capital and imperialism allied
with reaction have created such a
climate
that the armed forces have broken with
their traditions
those tragic traditions which generate
ida
had taught them and commander raya
reasserted
both victims of the same social sector
of those same people who today will stay
in their homes waiting to reconquer
power
through the action of others in order to
continue to defend their profits
and privileges
is
the tragic experience of underdeveloped
countries
shows that the intensity and scope of
cia action
is in direct relation to the magnitude
and strategic importance of north
american interests
and the level of development and
organization of the liberation movements
in chile the two conditions developed
simultaneously
that accounts for both the old and the
new strategy
of the sierra extending into almost
every national activity
reconstituted
with the cia history in chile now
partially revealed to the public
one can begin to reconstruct the
abundable trail
of north american aggression against our
people
1964 the cia turned over three million
dollars
to the christian democratic party in
order to help the presidential campaign
of eduardo frey against the popular
candidacy
of salvador allende 1969
on the eve of another presidential
election the cia distributed
five hundred thousand dollars quote in
order to maintain those
individuals who would sustain the
anti-agenda forces
end of quote 1970 another half million
dollars are handed over to the leaders
of the political parties opposing the
candidacy
a meeting to analyze the possibilities
of an agenda victory takes place with
the attendance of john
a macon a director of itt and former
director of the cia
and richard helms then acting director
of the cia
henry kissinger convokes an
extraordinary meeting
of the 40 committee in which the cia is
authorized
to distribute four hundred thousand
dollars among the press
radio and television companies opposed
to agenda
september 14 harold s janine
president of itt proposes his plans to
kissinger
to intervene in chile saying that he is
quote
prepared to help economic economically
with sums
up to seven figures for operations that
will preserve
the interests of itt and chile end of
quote
on the 15th of september the state
department authorized
authorizes charles corey ambassador to
chile to do everything possible to
prevent
in this assumption of the presidency at
the end of september richard helms
director of the cia instructs william v
bro of the cia clandestine services
division for the western hemisphere to
meet with edward
charity vice president of itt in the
meeting they studied quote
possible actions to apply economic
pressure
intended to prevent the ratification of
salvador allendes president of chile by
the national congress
between september and october the cia
spends 350 000
to bribe chilean legislators
against the eminent ratification of
agendas president
in october general rene schneider
commanding chief of the army is
assassinated
the purpose of the crime is to provoke
the intervention of the armed forces
and thus stop the congressional
ratification of allende
among the platters we find all alchiaga
a cia agent born in chile and resigning
residing in venezuela
who makes a special trip to chile during
the days of the conspiracy
after allende takes office a meeting
takes place between john mcconne
and william bro to examine quote
contacts with selected members of the
chilean armed forces who
would be able to lead some type of
uprising end of quote
judy kessler an aid aid official in
santiago
in a memorandum to dean r hinton cia
economic analyst in the u.s
embassy in santiago dated october the
2nd presents the diverse
long and short-range north american
options for the destruction of the
popular unity government
the national security council nsc
with authority over the cia approves the
anti-chile policy
of the quote invisible blockade
in chile john b tipton and james e
anderson
are put in charge of directing the
network of agents
infiltrated into the parties of the left
and of the right
in accordance in accord with the
following outline candlestone operations
group
robert g o'neal val moss donald h winter
and fred shaina
work group against cuba socialist
countries and foreign residents in chile
alan d smith franklin tonini and arnold
m isaacs note north american residents
in chile were controlled by the consular
officials
in addition to those mentioned hadi
slaughter
schroederman now ambassador to venezuela
john p tipton keith wheelock and joseph
f mcmanus were also part of his network
raymond warren local chief of the cia
arrives in october
the network formed under his direction
includes among others the following
group of operations and communications
propaganda and psychological warfare
claude villarreal paul l good dennis a
allred para military operations group
with links outside of chile leo g kappov
bolivia david mcgrath rio de janeiro
roberto l taylor bolivia clarisse
r hollywell sao paulo
military intelligence dia worked with
the cia
lawrence a corcoran william hun
james switzer adrian schreiber and john
carrington
with the air force later decorated by
pinochet for his participation
in the bombardment of the government
palace and other targets
at the end of 1970 the 40 committee
presided over by henry kisinger
authorizes the cia
to distribute 5 million for a
quote destabilization effort and of
course against the government of
president agenda to be used between 1971
and 1973
1971 january a special committee is
formed
under the auspices of itt to pressure
the united states government
and influence international credit
agency and thus to threaten the chilean
government with economic cows
the dnr hinton specialist
in the field of economic intelligence
plays an important role in coordinating
the campaign for the economic cows as
director
aid in chile in 1971 he is called to the
u.s to fill a position
on a subcommittee of the national
security council charged with defining
government policy
regarding the nationalization of north
american interests aboard
today hinton has become ambassador to
there
in february nixon declares that the
election of a socialist president in
chile can have profound implications for
the inter-american system
in march howard c edwards is arrested by
the chilean police
for his possible involvement in an
international maneuver to cause a
reduction
in the price of copper edwards had
participated
in the bail pigs invasion and had worked
in czechoslovakia
during the 1968 occurrences frederick
w latosh aed official
who participated in the fall of jacobo
advanced advance in guatemala in 1954
and in the description of the of the
rome
ruma government in ghana in 1967
is named political director of the u.s
embassy in santiago
[Laughter]
military organization is formed in chile
under the operational
experience of the cia the american
institute for free
labor development a felt
under the leadership of robert o'neill
country program director for chile
contributes to the formation of cuproc
confederation of chilean professionals
an entity which was to play a decessive
role
in the truck owners and merchant strikes
from 1972 and 1973
and mundo paris sukovich ex-minister of
the interior
in the edward freight government is
assassinated in june
with the evident purpose of creating
conditions for a coup d'etat
of the people a group said to be of the
extreme left
was responsible for that crime the group
was infiltrated by panamanian elements
panamanian elements serving the cia
vice president of itt william c merriam
writes to peterson reiterate reiterating
proposals intended to suffocate the
chilean economy through the rejection of
international loans
and suspension of the importation of
copper and other goods
this was meant to create sufficient
economic cows
to stimulate the intervention of the
armed forces he proposes that the cia
collaborate in this process
secretary of state rogers meets with
representatives of
anaconda ford motor company first
national city bank
rostrum purina company and itt in the
get-together it is proposed to embargo
spare parts and materials for chile
and to cut off all forms of north
american aid the united states changes
its ambassador in chile
the position is filled by anthony
nathaniel
p davis who began his career as an
official of the oass
office of strategic services precursor
of the cia
he was formerly assigned to
czechoslovakia the soviet union in
bulgaria
and he was also in chile as head of the
peace corps in 1963.
previous to his new appointment in chile
he had been
ambassador in guatemala the post he
assumed immediately after the abduction
and execution of his predecessor
producer john gordon
maine and actually an ambassador in
in the for the south for 14 south
african countries
1972 on march 21 united states
journalist jack anderson
revealed the plans of itt and the cia
against the popular unity government
the same journalist makes public a
secret cable from ambassador nathaniel
davis
to the state department which suggested
that in preparation for a military coup
it is first necessary to create quote a
discontent so profound
that a military intervention would be
warmly received
end of quote the u.s corporations
operating in chile
resort to economic sabotage fought more
to suspend his activities and closes its
plant
general motors does likewise shortly
thereafter
roston purina is brought under state
control when it becomes clear
that it is deliberately reducing
production it is not paying custom taxes
and is violating the law of
international exchange
kenny cotton and anaconda obtained the
embargo
of chilean products in the united states
and freeze the accounts of the various
chilean governmental agencies in new
york
some of which include those of the state
copper corporation and the production
development
agency codifier it becomes increasingly
difficult
for chile to get parts and replacements
for u.s produced machinery
the result is that 21 percent of the
taxes of the taxes
and 31 percent of the public
transportation becomes immobilized
kennecott brings suit in france to block
the payment for copper sales to the
government of chile
private u.s banks cut seals access to
credit
from 200 million to 35 million they
suspend all credits to suppliers
wolf research and development
a quote privately end of quote owned u.s
corporation
proposes to chile a series of research
programs
involving remote sensors placed in
nasa's satellites
as part of the earth's and skylight
programs the application of this
technology
for supposed research consists of
terrain information
photographs peonage flights and air
detection of mineral deposits
you know habens ex director of life
magazine
handed over four hundred thousand
dollars to alvaro puga of el mercurio
newspaper
the money was obtained by the cia from
the forty committee
to finance propaganda against the
popular unity government
in october general cesar luis
commander-in-chief of the air force
travels to the u.s invited by his
counterpart general john ryan
from this trip the chilean air force
obtained a five million dollar
credit in contrast the popular unity
government in three years only received
three million dollars in credits from
the united states
in 1972 no more than 13 to 20 percent of
chilean airports
imports came from the us compared with
about 40 percent
in preceding years in the financial
arena
the percentage of short-term credits
which chile received from the u.s was
reduced from 78
to 6.6 on october 11 of this year
the first owner strike is declared
preceded by a commercial
shutdown and followed by the truck
owner's lockout
these seditious activities were intended
to paralyze the economy of the entire
country for several weeks
this action just happened to coincide
with the european embargo
of chilean copper as a result of
connecticut's legal maneuvers in france
the cia has revealed recently financed
the owner's shutdowns
in and inundating the black market with
dollars
december 1972 jorge guerrero secretary
of the national command for greenville
defense
which directed the owners shutdown is
invited to washington by
a felt 1973 alexander sanders
ex-agent of the cia was able to escape
to the u.s
and informs the chilean authorities of
the preparation of a military coup
against the popular unity government it
was the so-called centaur plan
sanders a company accompanied his
denunciations with
conclusive evidence including
intelligence report
and taped materials at the request of
the cia
and in order to finance the activities
of the national party
and the christian democrats the u.s
government provided two hundred
and three hundred fifty thousand dollars
respectively president agenda's naval
attack mandate
is assassinated in the early morning of
july 27 1973
by members of the alteritis group
fatherland and liberty
organized by the ca cia two years before
on that same date a new truck owner's
strike
starts that will include merchants and
professionals simultaneously
a huge wave of terrorist actions spread
all over the nation
a high tension tower is blown up when
president triend is addressing the
country on tv and radio
padres fatherland and liberty
backed by the cia did not conceal its
responsibility in this affair
the chilean naval intelligence service
contributed to the effort with logistic
advice
michael townley a north american citizen
and member of the peace corps in chile
during president's fail
president frey's government returns to
chile
as a cia agent to call to collaborate
with fatherland and liberty
he was in charge of a five-man brigade
to carry out a dangerous sabotage
operation in the city
of conce in the city of concepcion at a
power plant
although they failed in their objective
they killed
the night watchmen of the plant thomas
enriquez
townley managed to escape to argentina
and from there flew to the u.s
paolo rodriguez head of fatherland in
liberty
visited the us and made contacts with
bernard barker
frank sturgis and the counter
revolutionary cubans behelio gorsales
and eugenio martinez who had
participated in the spirulinas
and robbery of documents from the
chilean embassy in washington
a year earlier on may 15
the union of professional employee
employees from the el teniente copper
mine
started a strike the mine had been
expropriated from kennecott
this strike is directed by guillermo
medina who is directly advised by the
airfelt
as well as by the by a fatherland and
liberty leaders
such as manuel fuente wedling presently
press attached to general tawali
on june 29 a tentative coup is defeated
it is led by the armed regiment number
two
and by civilians from fatherland and
liberty paolo rodriguez and other
leaders of this fascist group
sought refuge in the embassy of ecuador
and left the country
it is thought that the june 29 attempted
coup was so poorly mounted
because of a failure of communication
between the cia
directly linked with fatherland and
liberty
and the dia the pentagon's defense
intelligence and
agency which was working with the
chilean military traitors
in august 1973 the cia is authorized to
invest
1 million additional dollars in chile it
is held
that this allocation was cancelled when
the coup took place
the truth is that the sun was spent as
has been publicly acknowledged
two hundred fifty thousand dollars of it
went for a radio station
thousands of dollars were used to
finance public relationships
of junta officials shortly after the
coup the rest is not yet accounted for
the u.s ambassador to chile nathaniel
davies
travels to the us to meet with the
special group of the national security
council
dealing with chile he comes back to
santiago just before the coup
in september 1973 ships from the u.s
navy
arrived in chilean waters to participate
in the joint maneuvers called operacion
unitas
at the same time 32 u.s observation
and battle planes land in mendoza
argentina
15 of the planes leave 48 hours after
the coup
simultaneously 150 north americans
described as quote specialists in air
acrobatics
end of code arrive in chile on september
richard nixon is informed
about plans for the military queen chile
september the 11th the military court
takes place
the popular government is overthrown
president allende is murdered
and the fascist dictatorship is
installed
so
[Laughter]
the fact that the u.s warships of the
unitas maneuvers
were standing by ready to help in case
they were needed
was disclosed
another fact is revealed and denounced
that the day of the coup
the wb 570
plane plate number six three one two
three nine eight
was operated in chile by majors v duenas
and t
er from the u.s air force this plane was
a flying electronic control station
serving to coordinate the communications
of the putis
the german magazine neo berliner
illustrator
of december 25th 1973
states that they have a confidential us
army document
taken from a vault at fort gulick
panama outlining a plan to destroy the
popular unity government
the u.s plan revealed in germany has
characteristics very similar to the
events
of september 11th
walter
with the collaboration of the cia the
dia
and the help of the brazilians and
german experts
such as walter ralph former leader of
the
of the gitapo the man responsible for
developing
hitless mobile gas extermination units
chile's national department of
investigations dina
comes into existence under the defense
ministry
dina is responsible for most of the
tortures
and crimes in chile
amigos
what you have heard is a very short
resume
of open north american intervention in
chile in chile's
internal affairs up to 1973.
what has occurred since the coup is more
widely known
no events in recent times have so
wounded international sensitivity
as the barbarism taking place in my
country
these events have been unanimously
repudiated
in every corner of the world no
government is so completely discredited
and morally isolated as the military
junt of chile
in 1974 the push's thirst for blood
has extended even beyond the frontiers
to buenos aires argentina
to carry out the cowardly assassination
of general khalid pratt's and his wife
the gangster methods adopted through the
cia
now boomerang on their own practitioners
the disappearance
of general or carbonia presumed
successor
to the data pinochet who who fell with
the wither with a helicopter
carries the trademark of the methods
used by hitler
to eliminate his possible competitors
[Laughter]
as grotesque and repugnant as the role
played by the fascist junta
one year and a half after the coup we
have absolute confirmation
of the participation of the cia and
imperialism
in the liquidation process against the
longings of a people for liberation
[Music]
as surely as the responsibility for such
deeds
falls upon the previous administration
of the united states
especially upon nixon the current
president
has astonished world public opinion by
declaring
that the policy was carried out quote in
the best
interests of the chilean people and
certainly of the united states
end of quote that is to say
that the president the present
government of the us
openly proclaims the right to intervene
by whatever means
no matter how illicit dirty or criminal
they
may be in the internal processes of the
people of this hemisphere
whenever their monetary interests make
it seem advisable
in september
in september of last year when president
ford
recognized and confessed the north
american intervention in chile
he argued that it was done to help save
the communications media
of the opposition parties
for his part as is well known henry
kissinger
told the u.s senate that quote the
activities of the cia
had as their object the prevention of
the establishment
of a one-party government by a minority
president
end of quote
[Laughter]
the question arises where is the concern
of mr ford
and of mr kissinger now when all
political parties have been suppressed
all public liberties abolished the
national congress has been closed down
and the country has been converted into
a showcase of concentration camps
is
the attempt to justify this intervention
has been based on what is called a need
to defend democracy
this argument lacked any base at all
during the years of the popular unity
government but acquires full validity
today under the junta's fascist
dictatorship nevertheless
we observe that the only industrialized
country
whose government helps that tyranny
politically
financially and militarily is the united
st
[Laughter]
one can only conclude that the true
objective
of the united states interventionist
policy has been to install
a fascist model government that would
ensure
what the transnational companies call
quote the social peace
in a climate favorable to foreign
investment
end of quote the peace of the cemetery
created by the military junta is exactly
the social peace
sought after by those same transnational
corporations
it is clear that the intervention
practiced in chile
is only one single case in a general
policy of intervention
and collusion between the u.s government
and the interests of north american
investment abroad
especially those of the multinational
companies
itt kennicott anaconda etc etc
this big-headed police-like conduct
carries the implicit objective of
installing fascist regimes in
underdeveloped countries and not only
violates
recognized norms governing relation
between states
institutionalized in the chart of the
united states nations
but moreover clearly contradicts those
ideals for which the people of the
united states
have fought ever since their
independence
conflict
explicitly
this conflict between the real interests
of the north american people
and the policy of foreign intervention
explains the deception of the u.s
government
in the effort to justify this duplicity
to the citizens of the united states
the leaders of the government find
themselves in increasingly
clear and difficult contradictions how
can the us government
possibly convince its people that the
barbarism and terror in chile
is compatible with the ideas and
interests of the great majority of north
american citizens
[Laughter]
in chile how can the north american
government
try to convince its people that the
association between the cia
and itt a corporation that collaborated
with
the nasa's during the second world war
even
as u.s soldiers were dying on european
fronts
in the fight against fascism can
contribute
to the strengthening of democracy either
in chile or in the united states
when will president gerald ford put an
end
to support of the fascist military junta
offering financial credits
and military aid beyond anything ever
dreamed of
by our government of popular unity
foreign how can the us government
convince its people
that in order to fulfill the ideals of
abraham lincoln
it is it is necessary not to help those
sinister forces which seek to establish
fascism
on a worldwide scale making no exception
of the united states
north american french
the reaction of the u.s people to the
revelations of cia activity both abroad
and within the united states shows us
that there is a reserve of
moral power that can prevent abdication
of those ideas of liberty
which have been fought for by
generations of citizens
it appears that the north american
people are beginning to understand
that it is impossible to help fascism
abroad
without becoming exposed to those same
forces
inside the united states
[Music]
el presidente
in order to legitimize the shameless
violation of mutual respect
between nations whether they be powerful
or not
president ford has thrown the charter of
the united nations in the waste basket
and tries to raise the law of the jungle
to the plane of international relations
the peoples of latin america or vietnam
of
laos of cambodia have been the victims
of practices
in the bloody tradition of nazi fascism
today the united states has the sad
privilege
of breathing new life into those
traditions
[Laughter]
at least imperialism has begun has begun
to pay a price
for unleashing its aggression against
the popular unity government
presided over by salvador allende the
price
is the awakening and strengthening of
the consciousness
of the peoples and of many governments
about the direct threat of fascism
as a new pattern of domination in our
epoch with that
we have witnessed the extensive and
profound growth
of a movement in solidarity with the
chilean people
this movement represents an answer to a
terrible outrage
against the human rights and dignity of
a small nation
and expresses furthermore the
recognition that we are dealing with a
situation
that endangers all of humanity
latin america
[Music]
the chilean drama not only encompasses
the contradictions of chilean and latin
american society
but those of the third world in general
in the case of chile
we have the liquidation although moment
momentary
of a nation which has carried forward a
process of emancipation
this points out to us that is that it is
the nations
of the third world the unaligned nations
which are and which will continue to be
the principal targets
of imperialistic aggression
initiative
through you we address the people of the
united states
we wish to take this opportunity to
thank you for your efforts
to unmask the aggression being waged
against the chilean people
we would also like to express in a very
special way
our recognition of the efforts of those
fine
north americans who have demonstrated
their convictions
in effective and moral solidarity with
the victims of the tyranny
we applaud the initiatives of those
distinguished political leaders
who reject the announced visit to chile
by secretary of state
henry kisinger his visit not only
signifies support to the junta
but also serves to legitimize a regime
which violates all human rights
in a responsible manner we would also
like to offer
the warning that when fascism is flashed
from our country the chilean people will
disown
and reject abso absolutely whatever
accords
whatever packs whatever treaties agreed
to by the military junta with whatever
state
or international organism
is
finally it is our duty to appeal to the
conscience
of the north american people to prevent
the continued support
of your government for the most bloody
regime that has been known in the
history of latin america
the dictatorship of our pinochet
the north american people cannot
continue
as accomplices in a policy contrary to
their own best interests
consequently
[Music]
consequently the demand must resound
for the suspension of all military aid
to the junta
suspension of all the credits against
any
renegotiation of the external debt and
for the defense of human rights in chile
confronting this tangible danger of
fascism
the so-called silent majority must
convert itself to an
active thundering majority for democracy
in paulo neruda's words
we quote let let the rail split awake
you are vast and beautiful north america
your
origin is humble like a washerwoman's
beside your rivers
white shaped in the unknown it is your
piece
of honeycomb that is most sweet it is
your piece that we love
not your mask your warrior's face is not
handsome
um
[Applause]
widow of assassinated president salvador
allende
of chile speaking before a conference on
the central intelligence
agency recorded april 5th 1975
in new haven connecticut on the campus
of yale university
for more information on the central
intelligence agency
contact center for national security
studies
122 maryland avenue northwest washington
dc
2002 this program was produced at radio
station wwuh
in west hartford connecticut